In the morning I was shooting records in the house.
And the big gun shot. to portray us. The big gun is
shot, so I bide kindly back up in the house. The
overseer asks me, what is that up that is thunder? I
tell him, I don't know. I know what the amp is. And so
he shot three times, and he commenced to shoot,
until the pit commenced to rattle on the field. And
he called me and told me to run down in the field and
tell Peter to turn the people loose, that the
Yankees come. And so I ran down in the field and
hooped and hollered at him, Peter, and told him,
Mr. Giggles, he'll turn the people loose because
the Yankees come. The driver. And so he said that
Wallace was lying. He said so. Like he said, so then
the Yankee beat to the land and they drunk. You
understand, they down south gettin' mighty poor.
They used to drink coffee but now they drink dry.
They say, let's raise the uniband, make the rebel
understand. To leave our land for the sake of Uncle
Sam. They down south gettin' mighty poor. Shut out
the white cat and see the rebel run. I ain't gonna go
with them two again. I'll get over all of them. Yes.
And that, the people then show where they go then.
They show where they go and they call we all up, you
know, and give you all freedom. Because we are this
much as free as them. Now you understand. But the
Yankee thing must go back to the South there, help
me. But they didn't. Of course, there was so much
doubt and things in the way. They would have done
more. But there's so much doubt in the way. It
couldn't be called. The colored people sure went
for it. And some white people sure went for it too.
You understand? And the redder had them and had me.
I'm satisfied so far. What the Lord has done for me,
I come through to all who've been up and down
through the militia. Well, tell me about how they
went to Hawkinsville and drove the sword down on
the ground. They told them, they know you.
What do you remember about when slavery was over?
You stayed at home when you stayed? I can't tell you
about that. Well, hadn't you said you'd stay,
okay? Go on, tell me about coming through here with
cannons. Yes, yes. No, I'll tell you a mistake. Way
back in slavery time, I would stand after the
people were free. I would go out every day, right in
town, to see the Yankees all going back home. I can
really disagree that they have six and eight moons
to count, going through, and boats on them,
counting, counting, then they put the wagon, and
have boats all on them wagon. What would it mean?
Have a little mule. And one man, I ride him, ride the
two mules. We always take a look at him. Have a look
at him. All day long, I'd be crossing. I would just,
well, and all the Yankees, I'd be like, dressed in
blue clothes. I can remember, we'd go jump right
here, and have a little pillow on the coat right
there, in the background, and courses up there. I
would go just as well, just to come down, and
then... Black men have maybe, oh, I don't know how
many black horses. Then they come along again with
all these old green men on it. This is them cameras.
And then they come back with horses, saw horses.
All these have all gone to town. That way for two
days, they've gone out to town for two days. And I
remember, and the Yankees stopped here. And the
maggots stopped right on the corner of the square.
I was a good-sized boy then. And what they called
freedom dealers, you know what I'm saying? And the
prosecuting people, you know, what they do, you
know, and all like that. And I regret hardly to call
them. I've seen two men they had that were
punishing for what they do. And I've seen them take
them. That had a little big tent. We boys would go
out and see him. And they'd take him, hang him up
with a slum. And they'd let the tip, at that time,
hang out so many men, they'd let him down. That's
the punishment they got. We'd let the old man, he
hadn't come, an old dead, his name was Yankee
White. And the man, the judge's name,
I forgot his name. But then I knew he looked like
Yankee White. That's what he used to do when he was
young. Well, then they come, and my old master,
O'Connor McRae, he brought two of the horses for
him. I rode the horse many times. One of them was a
big horse they called Yankee Tom, a big, solid
horse. And another big old horse was a saddle horse
O'Connor McRae bought, and he was called Boston.
He was a good, big, black horse. He took them all
down to the farm. He took all of that. Good big boys,
eh? Good big boys. And the Yankees would come, and
at the fire, there'd be a whole troop of men come.
They said they were Yankees. All walking. All
walking. That crew of Yankees would go soon. Next
time you see, there'd come a whole troop of
Yankees. All riding horses. big guns hanging on
there, all that stuff, you know. The oldest,
tenderest man, all going home. And I said, I asked
him, I said, I said, I said, Mama, where are they
going? He said, they're all going home now. And old
Colonel Crater, his old master, he was looking at
it. He said, well, hey, all of you niggas is all free
now. Yankees are all going home. I remember I got
dishes for you. Right, right in town. So while we
lived there, right where we knew The new post
office. That's my old master's home. Up above the
old post office. Well, that is his square. From
that post office, clean down to the Citizen Bank.
Oh, that is his whole square now. And clean over to
the other part. Come out on up to the Church. That's
my old master's place. I can remember he was a
speculator. I can remember a good big boy then.
They had a big old shed there. And they had cotton
all in that shed. And we boys all got put on that shed
every day. And they had wagons there. Every day
he'd load up all them wagons and take all that
cotton and go. Now you see, that was in slavery
time. And he'd bring back a whole lot of colored
people. They said he was a specklehead. And he'd
sell them to all these people around this town.
There's a lot of old people all dead now, but he
brought them too. We'd all go up and bring them in.
Oh, you look over there. My old, my old, my old papa
was a wagoner. I used to go, he used to carry me with
him all the time. Used to haul cotton, cat cotton,
and jasmine to wire this bluff. And, and cat
cotton, wire this, and this cat cotton, Over here,
there's a place called...
I forgot the place now. I can't come down there. I
remember he used to be here. I was a good big boy at
the time. And he had an auction. He had an auction.
He had an old auction named Brandy. I thought, how
come there's this wagon up? He'd get tired and sit
down and build. Oh, yes, sir. Get on up. Get this
one. Get on. And I'd ride old Brandy. Ride old
Brandy and drive the rest of them. Right here, so I
tried to get down and walk right on down. I'd be
like, oh, Nick, I've been through a heap. A heap,
all of that stuff. That didn't save a time. That
didn't save a time. And I remember, I can tell you
what saved a time. Right down, I can tell you this,
if I can. Right down close to Mr. Nicky Mays' place,
there was no jailhouse on. Old, long jailhouse.
Over all jailhouses now. That's the only, that's
the only, that's the only, and there was no, there
was no, some kind of a courthouse. I rejected. And
they used to put prisoners in that jailhouse. And
me, me, and another young white fellow was raised
in there, and call him a cray and hand him on. And we
used to go home, the people that owned some things,
we used to go home and steal. braid the stuff and
focus with them little bars to the prisoners with
the boys that's why i can't juggle and there's no
old jailhouse and all around our place and i regret
one time we all was looking at it and they brought in
they had hounds and they broke down hounding and
broke three needles with the hound lovely knees
you know cutting wood and they Right across the
creek there, they take them niggas and put them on
the log and put them on the log and put them on the log
and put them on the log and put them on the log and put
them on the log and put them on the log and put them on
the log and put them on the log and put them on the log
and put them on the log and put them on the log
What's
that you said? What is that you said, Uncle Bob?
What about? Then, the machine went off and I didn't
hear you. I said, I'm glad Noah got acquainted with
you because I believe he's a good man and I want him
to be with a good man. Well, tell me, where were you
born, Uncle Bob? I was born not far from this place,
up here south, west of here, about five miles. And
how old are you? Well, now, I told you about over the
December, 7th of summer, two or three. My daddy
told me I was 19 years old on the 18th of December.
And that's all I can go by. 18th of December when?
Well, 1880. Yeah. And you don't know how to figure
how much that is that makes you now? No, sir. I'm a
full freedom.
You told me a story or two about yourself and about
your father as we came along. What was it? Well,
just mention it so I know what you're talking
about, and I can start it over with you and I'll read
it. Well, was your father a songster like you?
Nothing more than hymns, hymns. He was a regular
church man. Well, what kind of songs did you sing
when you were young? Well, I didn't just holler
reels, just fiddle reels, you know, all the time,
my singing. Were you a fiddler yourself? No, sir,
no, sir. I couldn't make no music at all. Well, you
could make music with your mouth. Oh, yes, I could
do that. I sure would do that. Everywhere you'd
hear me, you'd hear me singing a song, a reel. And
out in the field, what'd you do when you were
working? That's what I'd do, hollering, singing
reels. And what was it you sang about the cotton?
About Little Joe? Yeah. Little Joe. My son told me
to pick a little cotton. The boy said, done for the
seeds all rotted. Well, I said it just like you did
to me in the car. I said it louder. My son told me to
pick a little sun before he set down. Seat's all
rotten. Get out of the way, old man. Tucker comes
too late to kick through a slipper. I don't believe
I heard you sing it. Well, how did you tell me you
used to call your sweetheart out at night? Let me
see. I nearly forgot what I was supposed to holler.
What's all the hollering for? In hollering. They
tell me one word every so often, what they're
talking about. They said you didn't have any
starch or salt. Yes. No salt. Louder. Sing it
louder. No salt. No starch. Nobody to wash my
clothes. Nobody to wash my clothes. I hate to say
it, but my voice, it broke. Well, didn't you say you
used to sing that in the field, too? Yeah, I sang
that in the field, too. Yes. Would your sweetheart
be out there in the field? No, she'd be joining.
Joining fields, you know. Uh-huh. Well, what were
some of the other old field hollers that you used to
have? When you, I'm going home, I'm going home,
I'm going home. I was one of them. Well, when you
wanted to, when you wanted to summon a boy from
across the creek, way far off, how would you, how
would you notify? I just hollered, I hollered, you
hear me holler, and he'd answer me way, way on.
Well, what was the holler? That same thing I'll
sing. No snow. No sky. Nobody to wash my clothes.
Nobody to wash my clothes. The same old horror. And
he danced way out of his field. What'd he say?
Ma'am? What would he say? Well, he'd say the same
thing. And how would he sing it? Sing it like he did.
No sun, no stars. Nobody to wash my clothes. Nobody
to wash my clothes. And if he took a notion, then
he'd say, I'm going home. I'm going home. I'm going
home. I know that he'd come as soon as he got supper.
It's a white folk kitchen. I'm looking for him.
Now, you told me about the man that you worked for
for 10 or 12 years, Mr. Norwood. And you said he's
the meanest man in the country. Well, they said so.
Them Norwoods worked for the meanest people in the
world around them. Well, how did it treat you? It
treated me all right. The nine one of them never did
cuss at me the whole 12 years. I didn't care what I
went to them for, I got it. Bowels of flour, middles
of meat, chags of molasses, money any time. Now
that Judge Noah, as the oldest boy, if his store
would be full of hands, you know, he was more than
old to know what he was doing. I'd just tell him,
give me a pencil and a piece of paper. He'd hand it to
me, and I'd write it on there and tell him, I want a $5
piece of it. I'd hand it to him, go on by my business.
First thing you know, he'd come on by me, text me,
and give it to me. He'd do me that way just to show me,
just to show me that I'm a leader. What was it the old
merchant, what was it the old merchant told you?
You told the old merchant down here, Mr.
Mooringford. Me and him was talking down one day
and wasn't nobody in there but me. I say exactly
what you said now. Yes, but wasn't nobody in there
but me and him and his son and his son's daughter.
And I said, Mr. Corrigan, I forgot exactly how old I
was, but anyhow, I said, I'm 61 or two years old, and
I never had no trouble in my life. I said, I never
asked the noise for nickel, but they didn't give it
to me, in my life. And that one of them never
accosted me. And said, I ain't never been
summoned, and ain't never been arrested, and
ain't never been to the jailhouse but twice in my
life, and ain't been to the courthouse but twice.
He looked at me and cooked. He said, well, Bob, I'm
down. That ain't too much for a nigga to say. He
said, ain't no white man can say any better than
that. He said, ain't. I said, well, I'm telling you
the truth. I said, you can ask these people all
around the school that know me, and they'll tell
you I ain't never been in no trouble since I've been
there. Well, you said you hadn't been to the
jailhouse before. Did they put you in jail or what?
No, I just went by there. Went by the jail? Down the
street, yes. Well, when you had friends in jail,
didn't you go to see them? I didn't go to see them
because I always said, practice makes perfect. I
cried, I said so, and I just wouldn't go to see them.
I said, no, I ain't going to see them. I said,
practice makes perfect. I ain't going there. The
Lord knows I'm telling you the truth, what I said.
Uh, uh, how much, uh, how much school did you go to? I
never went to school a day in my life, not an hour.
Hey, hey, hey, howdy, howdy, howdy, howdy, yeah.
How you both feeling? Well, nobody here can tell
you I never went to school an hour in my life. Well,
uh... Well, go ahead. Dr. Noah, I never went to
school an hour in my life. Not an hour. Well, then
could you read and write? I could read and write,
too. I could send a letter all over this world if I
just knew where to send it. Of course, I can't write
it pretty like people do, but anywhere I know where
to send it, I can send it. Well, how'd you learn to
write? Well, my daddy just taught me how to spell a
little at night. Well, after that, then he took a
corpus, and I took a corpus and just learned
myself.
And how'd you learn to read? Well, he learned at
night. He said he wasn't no educated man. He could
just read print, and he'd sit up at night and teach
his children. That's the way we learned. I heard a
story about a judge asking a colored boy on the
witness stand. He said, Jim, can you read writing?
He said, no, sir, judge. I can't even read reading.
But you can read reading and write and go. And they
had a preacher who was trying to make a preacher out
of him. And I asked him, could he, did he know, did he
know theology? He said, no, sir, I never knew that
man in my life. I never been crazy with him. So I
don't know about no, nothing like that. How old
were you when you joined the church? I was 19 years
old. And how old were you when you got married? Oh.
Just in between it. Just started in between it.
Well, did your wife make you join the church? No,
sir. Let's join myself. Let's tuck a motion and
join myself. Well, how have you got along so well in
life? What's been your principles? Well, people
are after people. Anybody you know around here
hasn't bought my principles. I just went on. I just
like and know what a right to do and I always try to do
what's right.
Well, that's a mighty good way to do it, Pa. Yes,
sir. I know what's right and I try my best to do
what's right in everything I do. How many times
have you voted? Ain't voted but twice. vote for who
she wants, and vote for who the President of
the United States wants. Ms. Irene Williams
continues her singing on this record.
Another very interesting thing in my early
childhood was the Negro baptizing. All the
candidates for baptism were standing on the bank
of the pond over in Mr. Bailey's pasture, dressed
in long white gowns with white caps on their heads,
ready to be buried in baptism. And their song, as
they were being led into the water by the minister,
was this.
Oh, glory. Keep your lamp a-trimmed and a-burning
Keep your lamp a-trimmed and a-burning Keep your
lamp a-trimmed and a-burning Just like the light
of God
Oh, sisters Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning. Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning. Just like the light of God.
Oh, no, no. Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning. Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning. Just like the light of God.
Oh, sinners, keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning. Keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning, keep your lamp a-trimmed and
a-burning, just like the light of God.
And another thing that I remember on the
plantation that we hadn't mentioned before was
the churning song. Little Emma, the baby's nurse,
after the baby was tucked in bed, was often called
in the kitchen to do the churning. And this is a song
that she sang to the milk. Come, butter, come, Mr.
standing at the gate, waiting for the butter cake
to come, butter, come. Come, butter, come, Mr. is
waiting. Come, butter, come, Mr. is waiting.
Come, butter, come, the Mrs. is waiting. Come,
butter, come, the Mrs. is waiting. Mrs. is waiting
for the butter cake to come, butter, come. And
this
chant would go on through until the churning was
finished and the rich golden butter would come
into a solid cake on the top of the mill.
the meeting day at Oak Grove Church. The first
Sunday in August was a gala occasion for the
Negroes on the place. That was the day the big
practice meeting began over at Oak Grove Baptist
Church, a day of parade for the new dresses, new
suits, new hats, for each Negro was dressed out in
his Sunday dress. About 10 o'clock in the morning,
they would be on their way to church, And it looked
as if the divets of white, pink, blue, red, yellow,
and the variegated colors had outrivaled
themselves in putting out the brightest colors of
which their dresses were made from. Every pattern
wrote on the plate was filled with those who were
going to church. and the woods rang with their joy
and happiness and their calls to each other.
Morning there, Sister Maisie. How's y'all? Oh,
I'se tired but well, thank you. How's y'all?
That's sure am a pretty dress what you got on.
Where'd you get it? You're going out to shine all
them niggas in Old Rose Church today. Yes, ma'am,
you sure is going out to shine us all. Now you shut
your mouth, Jean. You know you're just poking fun
at me? How's your ma? Where's Fanny? Oh, she
coming. She got herself all dressed up. She say
she'd whine to get happy today and beat the very
stepping out of that gal of Susie. But I tell her, if
that's the spirit she's whining to church in, she
gotta stay at home. But she promised me that she'd
behave herself and be one of the first mooners on
the beach. And I tell her she can come on to church.
This was only preliminary of what would take place
when they all met under the big oak trees on the
church ground. All the kids and kin from miles
around would be there in their gayest mood. Soon
those inside of the church would begin the song
that would bring them in and start the worship, and
the big meeting began.
We'll get old
Yeah.
Yee-haw-lah-yah
Yee-haw-lah-yah Yee-haw-lah-yah
Oh, yes, get on board. I got good religion.
My woman. My
woman. My
woman. My woman.
Well,
well, well.
Praise the Lord, I got vision in my soul. Between 3
and 4 o'clock in the afternoon, you would see them
coming on their way back home. Now the chickens in
the barnyard had better reach high, for Brother
Andy and Brother Pfeiffer had a mighty tooth for
fried chicken when they was postulating the wood,
which meant in real terms was preaching. Brother
Andy did the preaching, and Brother Pfeiffer was
the said brother and amen man. In the most tense
moment, when the morning's bench was still full,
The moonest and the mightiest calls were being
made for them to come through. Old rough father
would go to the door and plead for the Lord to come
his self, not to send his son. We got no time to fool
with chillin' here tonight. Come right through
the cornfield. Don't take time to come all the way
around the road by Mr. John Coleman. Cause these
mooners are just about ready to come through. Then
the others will join in the prayer by singing.
Let's go.